Good afternoon.
Welcome to session 902,
AppleScript Introduction.
AppleScript Studio has been a
big hit since its inception.
It allows you to create
full-bore application with
gorgeous Aqua interfaces.
And to tell you all about it
and show you some examples,
I'd like to introduce the
AppleScript Studio engineer,
Tim Bumgarner.
Thank you, Jason.
I have a good friend of mine
that suggested that maybe
I should change my title to Mr.
AppleScript Studio.
Besides being a little bit presumptuous,
it actually appealed to me.
So I thought about it for a minute,
and then I remembered what the
acronym for AppleScript Studio is.
So who wants to go through life being Mr.
Ass, right?
All right.
Seriously, it's actually,
AppleScript Studio is a real team effort.
It took a lot of people and a lot of hard
work that we were able to build on top
of to bring this great product to you.
And this is a bit of our agenda today.
I would like to do a quick introduction,
talk a bit about the process of
building a studio application,
and then we're going to start on
the other end of the spectrum,
and we're going to take an already
existing Cocoa application and
add studio functionality to it.
And then we're going to talk
about using other languages.
And when I mean other languages,
I don't mean using other
AppleScript dialects.
I mean other programming languages.
And then we're going to talk a
bit about what's in store for
AppleScript Studio looking forward.
And if I...
Don't talk so fast,
or talk a little faster,
which is not a problem for me.
We'll actually have a little
time for Q&A at the end.
So what is AppleScript Studio and
what can you do with it?
What it is, it's that we've taken these
great technologies at Apple.
We had Cocoa,
what everything is built on top of it.
We've taken these developer tools,
Project Builder and Interface Builder,
and we integrated it all
together with AppleScript.
We integrated into each of the tools.
We developed a runtime framework
such that we could build and run
native Macintosh 10 applications.
And so it's really two things.
It's a development tool
or a development system,
and it's also a runtime.
That's sort of where
the studio name came in.
So let's talk a little bit
about each of these components.
The AppleScript kit is a
system library framework,
and this is sort of the
foundation for AppleScript Studio.
We need this for both the development
tools and for studio applications to run.
It contains the script suites that
make a studio application scriptable,
and most importantly,
it provides the link between
Cocoa and AppleScript,
so that when you click on a button,
AppleScript kit waits for that,
grabs that, and then executes the script
you've attached to that button.
And then on the development side,
we've got three plug-ins
into Project Builder,
and then we've also got an additional
plug-in into Interface Builder.
And we'll take a look at each of these.
The ASK plug-in is our editor,
so we can actually edit AppleScript files
right in Project Builder,
taking full advantage of the
check syntax and the things that
we're used to in Script Editor.
The dictionary plug-in provides
us with a built-in dictionary
viewer inside of Project Builder,
so we don't have to go into
Script Editor and to...
to look at our scripts,
or the various dictionaries
of a scriptable application.
So then we've also fully integrated
into the debugger plug-in UI,
so we can debug right
inside of Project Builder.
On the palette,
what we have is we've plugged
in a palette so that it provides
the AppleScript functionality we
need inside of Interface Builder.
It provides an inspector so that any time
you want to add AppleScript functionality
to your nib file,
you just simply go to that palette.
So what can you do with
AppleScript Studio?
Well, we can create native
Macintosh OS X applications.
Fundamentally,
what we're creating are Cocoa apps.
And so once you've built
it and delivered it out,
people can just double-click
and run with it.
It really is a Cocoa application.
And of course,
since it is a Cocoa application,
we can take advantage of
everything that Cocoa provides.
It provides some amazing, great services,
has a great, rich user interface,
and we get to take advantage
of all those things.
We can take advantage of drawers, sheets,
sliders, all those wonderful things.
But really,
the real power that we get to is we
get to leverage off of AppleScript.
Because not only can we
talk to local applications,
we can talk to applications
on other computers.
We can actually then also
talk to web services.
And that's a great direction
that we're moving in.
And some of the other things is that not
only can we talk to other applications,
we can actually talk to
the UNIX foundation that's
underneath Mac OS X using
the do shell script command.
That really opens up the possibilities.
And then also,
then we can leverage project
builders' ability to include
other programming languages.
So we can use C, C++.
We can do Objective C, Objective C++.
We can do Java,
either through the bridge or directly.
And so we're going to give you
some demonstrations of that today.
So what we'd like to do is actually
go through the process of building
an AppleScript Studio application
from scratch.
And to do that,
I would like to bring out John Coelho,
who's our Q&A manager,
to help me with the demo today.
John?
Thank you.
All right, so what we're going to do--
and I apologize to those that
came to the kitchen on Sunday.
We're going to see a little
bit of the same thing.
But we're going to build a
currency converter application.
And this application is going to
let us enter an exchange rate,
some dollars to convert,
and give us a simple calculation.
And we'll show you how
easy that is to do.
So John has chosen the new project.
[Transcript missing]
Okay,
and you can see that Project Builder
has opened a project for me.
It's already been set up so
it'll build a Studio application.
It has already added a default
empty AppleScript for us.
It has our main menu nib,
which contains our user interface.
And then it has this file
that John has selected called
AppleScriptKit.asDictionary.
What this is is sort of a
freeze-dried terminology,
because we haven't built a Studio app,
and since Cocoa apps
are dynamic terminology,
we needed a way to be able to look at the
terminology before you've built an app.
And so this is what we've come up with.
And so he's simply selected the
application object in the class,
and we can see all the various
elements and the properties,
and we can browse through that.
And there's also, under the file menu,
we can choose Open Dictionary.
So we don't have to go to Script Editor,
we can do it right here.
And this will show us all of
the scriptable applications
that are on our system,
and we'll choose the finder.
And you can see, again,
all the various classes and
events that are available.
All right,
let's go ahead and close those, John.
So let's go ahead and get started
with building our application.
And we always do that by
going into our user interface.
Let's double-click on mainmenu.num.
And it opens up our project
into Interface Builder.
And it just starts out by
default with an empty window.
First thing I'd like to do is go ahead
and change the title of the window.
Call that Currency Converter.
And we're going to go ahead and
start adding some text fields,
because what we want to do is enter a few
different values and do a calculation.
So go ahead and drag out a text field.
And you'll notice as he drags
around Interface Builder,
you get all the nice guidelines
that show us where the Aqua thinks
that it should be placed.
Make it a little bit wider.
And then I know that it's
going to contain numbers.
So there's also another object in
Cocoa that's called a formatter,
a number formatter in this case.
And you just drag it
right on top of that.
The other thing is that
since it's a number,
we want to right-align it.
So we go to the Attributes panel.
And we right-align that object.
Now I think we're ready.
We can go ahead and
duplicate that a few times.
A couple times there.
There's one and another one.
All right, great.
Now I know that the third one is
going to be a calculated field.
And I don't want to be able to edit.
So we're going to disable that
by checking off the editable.
But we do want it selectable
so they can copy the value.
Now we need some text labels.
And we're going to put
some values in here.
[Transcript missing]
And then another way of duplicating
objects in Interface Builder
is you can just hold down the
Option key and drag it up.
And again,
Aqua guidelines show you exactly
where the text baseline is.
And then we'll edit those values.
Great.
So now we've got our text field.
Everything's laid out pretty well.
Let's go ahead and drag it up to the left
and sort of center it where it should be.
Resize our window.
Oh, the other thing we need
is we need a button.
And we're going to click on that
to actually do our calculation.
Rename it to Convert.
Another thing we like to do
is make it the default button.
We do that by going to the key
equivalent pop-up and choosing return.
Not entirely obvious that
that's how you do it,
but that's where you do it.
All right,
let's shrink that window up a bit.
And let's test it.
We can actually test the interface
right here in Interface Builder.
So we go to the File menu
and choose Test Interface.
We can enter a couple values.
See the formatter in operation.
It automatically inserts the
proper number of decimal places,
commas.
We can just tab between the two fields.
But it looks like we
can resize the window.
Let's try that.
Well, oof, not at all what we want.
So we better go back and turn that off.
So we can just quit testing,
and we'll go to the window menu, palette,
and turn that off.
Okay, great.
I think everything looks great.
So now we've got our
user interface in place,
and we still haven't done
any AppleScript work.
Well, now we're going to go
ahead and start doing that.
And we do that by going to
the info window and choosing
the AppleScript pop-up.
Or the AppleScript panel from the pop-up.
And I want to just talk for
just a minute about that.
So what it provides is the
ability to name objects.
And I don't mean name as in the title.
They're named as in from AppleScript,
so that you can talk to
those objects by their name,
not by index.
And also, it shows you the index.
So as he clicks around
on different objects,
you'll see that the index changes
to show you what those indexes are.
Now,
the next section is the event handlers.
And every object has a certain set of
event handlers that it can actually
employ or produce or generate.
And so as he clicks on different ones,
you'll see that there's a different set
of event handlers that are available.
So let's go ahead and start naming, John.
Let's start with the window.
Go ahead and click on the window.
We can click on the back.
And we'll call that main.
And then we'll name each
of these text fields.
And so the first one we'll call rate.
The second one we'll call dollars.
And the last one we'll just go
ahead and label that amounts.
And then we need to
name our convert button.
Convert.
And now this is the point where we're
actually going to attach a script.
So when you click that button,
we want some AppleScript executed.
And you do that by simply
clicking on the click check box.
And then we're going to attach
it in-- or put it into the
Currency Converter AppleScript.
The one thing I didn't talk about
is the script section at the bottom.
What it does is it lists all of the
scripts that are in your current project,
and it also lets you create
new scripts right from here.
We're going to go ahead
and click Edit Script.
And we've already got it up.
Notice that in the script,
there weren't any handlers called clicks.
It automatically generated it for us.
And we're going to go ahead
and insert our script.
Tell window of the object.
Okay, the very first line.
Basically,
the object is the thing that was clicked,
so that's going to be the button.
And a button, through its inheritance,
has a property called window.
And so to simplify things,
we know that we're going to be asking
several UI objects in the window,
and so the simplest thing to do is
just say tell window of the object.
Otherwise,
we'd have to do it on every line.
And so what we want to do is
get the contents of text field
rate and convert it to a number.
We need it as a real.
So let's go ahead and add the next line.
We do the same thing for the dollars.
And then very simply, at the end,
we take that calculation,
the rate times the dollars,
and we put it back into the
contents of text field amount.
Let's go ahead and finish that up.
And that's it.
So if anybody's actually worked
with a currency converter
application in the OpenStep days,
this is just a little bit simpler.
So let's go ahead and build and run.
Okay.
And again, it's going through the
whole build process,
build and link the application.
Go ahead and type in a value, 1.5.
Let's try 2,000.
And he clicks on the,
go ahead and click on the convert button.
And nothing happened.
Alright, debugging 101.
Alright, let's go to quit.
Now let's see what we do wrong.
Let's go into,
it's not going to be the problem in here,
it'll be back in Interface Builder.
You typed in amounts.
Okay, go ahead and put it here.
It was supposed to be about... Okay.
And run.
Good catch.
What I need, QA team right out there.
Way to go, guys.
All right.
There we go.
3,000.
All right.
Now, I guess we could have taken that
time to check the debugging.
We're going to do it again anyway.
So we're going to actually show you
how well the debugger is integrated.
So let's go ahead and
quit the application,
John.
Let's go back to the script.
And let's put a breakpoint just about
where the rate's going to be set.
This time we're going to
choose Build and Debug.
And our window comes up,
and go ahead and enter your values.
And click on the Convert button.
And this time,
it'll break and stop on our breakpoint,
just like it would if it were in
Objective-C or any other language.
And we can actually see we've got
our frames in the one section,
we've got our variables
in the other part.
And then, of course,
we can see what current
line we're executing.
It shows us the globals for AppleScript.
Yes, you actually could change
the value of pi right here.
It shows us the properties of this file.
And then, of course,
the thing that we're most interested
in this particular case is the locals.
Now, right now,
it says-- it's hard to see.
It's not quite that large.
But it says,
view ID of window two-- window ID one,
I'm sorry-- in Jaguar.
That's for you.
I actually remembered.
It's actually going to say button ID too,
so it'll actually show you
what the type of thing is.
But let's go ahead and step across that.
And now it actually,
the rate has been defined,
so it shows up in the debugger.
Let's step one more time, the dollars.
So we can go right into the rates,
double-click on that value,
and we can change that.
Let's make it a three.
Makes it easy to
remember the calculation.
Okay.
And we'll hit continue,
and let's go back to the application.
And you'll see that instead of 3,000,
we got 6,000, so I can actually change
the variables as we go.
All right, thank you.
All right, so that's debugging.
So it is built right in and
works just like everything else.
Now, wouldn't it be great instead of
having to kind of think of some
number as an exchange rate to
actually go out and find the current
exchange rate for any given country?
So we're going to actually
take advantage of AppleScript's
built-in support for XML,
RPC,
and SOAP and to employ a web service.
And so let's go back
into Interface Builder.
Actually, yeah,
let's go find the service,
and then we'll worry about that.
XMethods is a great place to go find
some web services that are out there.
And as John scrolls down,
you can see that there's all kinds
of different services available.
You can find out what the
weather in Chicago is.
There's a Google search API.
But I do know that at the very
end of this long list is a service
called Currency Exchange Rate.
And given two countries,
it will give me the exchange rate
between that as a live value.
And if we look at the RPC profile,
it actually shows us all the parameters
that we're going to need to take
advantage of this web service.
So we'll shrink that down
so we can reference it.
And let's go back into
the Interface Builder.
Go ahead and minimize that window, John,
the other one.
There you go.
And let's go into Interface Builder.
And we need to make our
window a little bigger.
What we're going to do is we're
going to put a pop-up above there
and put a few countries in so
that we can choose a country.
And then we're going
to do our web service,
and then it'll put the value
back in the exchange rate for us.
So it drags it up.
Oh, you hit that right.
Perfect.
Didn't even have to change the size.
Okay, good.
And let's go ahead and change the value.
Or you can drag off the field.
We'll call that country.
Right-align it.
[Transcript missing]
Let's see, another Japan,
that would be fine.
And just for sanity's sake,
we'll put in USA just to test
our service to make sure,
because it should be, what, one, right?
So let's put USA.
Now,
it would be nice if the service actually
provided you the ability to go find
out what countries they supported.
Unfortunately,
this particular service doesn't do that,
so we'll just pick these.
So let's sort of resize everything,
make sure everything's where it belongs.
Actually, it looks pretty good.
Okay, good.
Now, the next thing we need to do is when
somebody chooses that pop-up menu,
we want to have some script execute,
just like we did before.
So we're going to select that.
We're going to go ahead and
click on the action handler.
That's the one that will be called
when we choose something from here.
And let's go to edit script.
And then what we're going to
do is go ahead and put in our
script for using the web service.
Now the very first thing it does,
go ahead and select the title
of the object as string.
And the object, of course,
is the pop-up menu.
And the title is the
currently chosen item,
or the text of it.
So that's what we want.
We're going to pass it to
a handler called getRate.
And then once we get that value,
we put it back into the
text field called rate.
So let's go down, and we're going to have
to add our getRate.
And we pass it the country.
We set up an initial value to
return so it has some known state.
This is an interesting one.
Set to country to get plain text.
I'll explain that in a minute.
All right, go ahead.
From country to USA,
because we're always going
to be converting from USA.
And now this is where
it gets interesting.
So just like you talk to an application,
like Tel Application Finder,
it's just as simple to employ a
web service by Tel Application,
the endpoint URL is what it wants,
or a URL.
And if we look in our window
down there in the WSDL,
we can actually see that it shows
us what the name of that is,
and that's the value that we have.
So let's add the next line.
All right, and this is where the
magic basically happens,
the call soap.
This command,
given all the parameters that you see,
and we'll talk about them in a second,
wraps up all these.
It's basically an AppleScript record.
It sends it off to the
Apple Event Manager.
The command tears it apart into XML,
properly formatted,
sends it across the wire,
waits for the response,
it comes back as XML,
and then reconstitutes it back
into an AppleScript object
that we can understand.
In this case, let's look at the output
parameter in the WSDL.
What is that?
I'm going to lift it up a bit.
The output parameter in
this case is just a float,
so what we're going to get
back is a simple number.
And there's the various
parameters in there,
but let's go ahead and continue
on with the rest of the line.
Go ahead and get right.
Now, I said that there's something
about that get plain text.
There's a known bug in the call
soap that it actually has to have...
It has to have the actual text,
so it's just a workaround that
we have for the moment so you
can get from Unicode text,
because everything in Studio,
because it uses Cocoa scripting,
is Unicode text, which is great.
But unfortunately,
it's just a known workaround.
We'll have this fixed.
Go ahead and just go through it, John.
All right, great.
Let's build and run this.
See if it works.
All right, so there's our-- we'll
go ahead and choose one.
And there's our value.
So it went across the wire,
got the value, and plugged it in.
And we can choose England.
Let's see what the yen is trading at.
128.
It's been about the same
for the last few days.
And then he can enter his values and do
the calculations and do a conversion.
All right, great.
Thank you, John.
Slides?
Okay,
so that's how you start from scratch
and build a Studio application.
And it really is nothing more than that.
You just kind of keep iteratively
building your application,
just keep adding a little
bit of user interface,
attaching some scripts.
So what I'd like to do is start
at the other end of the spectrum,
because when we thought
about this project,
we actually saw a wide
spectrum of different users,
people that could use Studio.
And one of those that we
wanted to actually work
with are Cocoa applications,
and being able to actually add
some Studio functionality to that.
And so there's a great scriptable
application called Sketch,
and it's fully scriptable,
which makes it even better.
And these are the things that
you need to do to make it a
Studio application or Studio-enabled.
And the first is you have to add
the AppleScript Kit framework.
You need to link against that.
That's what provides
all the functionality.
And then you need to add a build phase,
or an AppleScript build phase,
so that Project Builder knows
how to compile that AppleScript.
And then what we're going to do is,
once we've done that,
is we're going to add
a change color panel,
so that we'll add a menu item,
be able to choose that item.
And it'll bring a sheet,
and put it right in our document window,
and we'll be able to
do something with that.
So let's go back to the demo,
or to the demo one, please.
Alright, so let's open up Sketch.
This is the project
you all know and love.
And what we're going to do is go ahead
and select our external frameworks
and add our AppleScript kit framework.
And that's right there in System Library,
Frameworks.
All right, great.
The other thing we need to do is
add an AppleScript build phase.
And we do that by going
to the target window.
So these are the things that we do for
you when you choose a studio template.
They're all set up this way,
but we need to add it here in this case.
And he just simply goes
and adds that build phase.
So now that whenever
we add an AppleScript,
it'll end up in this build
phase and build appropriately.
All right, so I guess the other
thing we need to do now,
let's go ahead and start editing,
and we'll add our menu item.
So our main menu is really draw2.nib.
We're going to add a
menu item somewhere here.
And you can just simply drag it out.
And let's go ahead and
add a little spacer there.
Change that to change color.
Now, so we've got our menu item there.
Now what we need to do is
actually attach a script to that.
And there's a menu
category of event handlers.
We're going to choose
the Choose Menu item.
And now you can see that there aren't
any scripts in the project yet.
So we can go ahead and click
on New Script right here.
And we're going to call it Change Color.
Notice no extensions,
or at least there anyway.
Okay.
And now the next thing we need to do,
that's our menu item.
We've got something wired to it.
The other thing we want to
do is actually add our panel.
And for the sake of time,
we've got one that's pretty much built.
We'll just add it to our project.
[Transcript missing]
So I checked to see if that flag is true.
And if it's not loaded yet,
we're going to go ahead and load it.
And then we just set the flag
so this only happens once.
And now we want to get the
window that we created.
And we gave it a name
called Change Color.
And then we're going to get
the front document window.
Keep going.
And then we're going to display the
panel attached to the document window.
Now it's the attached to
portion that actually is going
to present it as a sheet.
If I said display the panel,
it would just put it up
as a panel or as a dialog.
And this way it's going
to come out as a sheet.
So let's go down and fill
out the click handler.
Now what this one is,
is this hand gets called if
you click the Change Color or
the Cancel button in the sheet.
In this case,
we want to see which one was clicked.
We want to know if the
object was changed color.
And then again,
we do our Tell Window as a shortcut.
And we look at the current
color of the color well.
We see if the checkbox
is on for fill ovals.
Continue.
Fill rectangles, and then fill text.
So we get our various states,
so we know what we have.
And now since we're talking
to Sketch as an application,
we couldn't pull its terminology
in because it's not built yet.
We actually have to use using terms from.
And this is something we're
looking at how to work with.
And go ahead and do the using terms.
And we're going to tell the
document of the document window.
If the fill ovals is on,
we're going to take advantage of
AppleScript's really powerful utility,
or feature that you can say every
color or every of something.
So in this case, we're going to set the
fill color of every circle.
And that's a class.
It's not the selected items.
It's just going to go find
every circle in my document
and change it to this color.
And then we do the same thing
for all of these others,
the rectangles, the text areas.
And we just finish up
the rest of the script.
And then at the very end,
we want to close our panel.
We've finished with it,
and we want to make sure it's closed.
Now the last thing we need to
add is our other handler for
Get Front Document Window.
And then simply given the front
document window gets the title
and finds that we're going to
have better support for documents,
and we'll talk about that later.
So let's do--the one thing we
forgot to do is that he'll notice
he's clicking on the Check Syntax.
And when he does that,
it's just like it is in Script Editor.
It does a compile and then gives
us-- makes sure everything's correct.
So let's go ahead and build and run that.
Now you might ask,
why would I want to do this?
Why would I, you know,
I've already got this Cocoa app,
why would I want to do it?
Well, there's a lot of different reasons.
One of them I can think of
is maybe for prototyping.
You've got some new feature
that you want to build,
and you're not sure you want to
invest a whole lot of time in order
to add this feature just to see
if it's going to work out well.
Well, it's a great way to prototype it.
You can put it together very easily,
just a little bit of script.
But I think that actually you'll find
that once you start this process,
you might find that it's just as good,
there's no reason to actually
switch it over to Objective-C or
whatever your native language is.
But the application is up
because it's a much faster
machine than what we tested on.
And you can see that we are going to
add some various graphic objects here.
And he's going to type in some text.
And if this demo works correctly,
he'll choose a change color.
Two for two.
All right, let's quit.
Go ahead and quit the application.
I know I was tempting, Faye.
All my rest of my demos
worked fine all week,
so.
No, no, not here, the menu item.
Oh.
[Transcript missing]
I was too busy blathering to notice,
so... All right, there we go.
So we got our sheet
just dropped right down,
and we're going to choose,
let's just change rectangles,
and it applies that color.
Let's choose it again, and this time,
let's click on the color well,
and we'll change it to some other color.
And go ahead and click
on the change color.
So you can see it's just applying
it just to those classes.
Thank you, John.
All right, slides please.
Okay, so we talked about how you actually
start with a Cocoa application and
add some Studio functionality to it.
Nope, turn this the right direction.
There we go.
Now the next thing I'd like to talk
about is how you can actually take
advantage of all the other programming
languages that are available.
And you can,
from your AppleScript in Studio,
I need to qualify this because it doesn't
work from scripts outside of Studio,
you can actually call any of these
languages that you see listed here.
And the key to it is
the call method command.
This call method,
you can jump into Objective-C code,
and then the Objective-C code can
let you get to these other ones.
And then it also will let you call
into not only code that you add,
but it can also call code that you have,
that Foundation has
already provided for you.
And we're going to give
you some examples of those.
And so I just want to talk for
just a moment about the various,
the call method itself.
And you'll see that the first,
there's really two variants of it.
There's really one command,
but it has a couple different
optional parameters.
And the first one is of object.
So you say call method, method name.
Method name is the Objective-C method
that you want to call.
And if you pass it an object,
it will actually call.
And you call the method of that object.
Now if the method happens
to take some parameters,
there's an additional parameter here.
And there's two choices.
You're going to have with parameter.
So if you're passing one parameter,
you would choose with parameter.
If you're passing two or more,
you would pass with parameters.
And you would pass it an
AppleScript list of those parameters.
The second one is for classes.
So we can also call class methods by,
say,
simply passing the class method name.
And then you pass of class.
And you pass it the string name of
the class that you want to call.
And this is really cool.
And this is really great because you
can easily call Java code doing this,
calling into static objects
and things of that nature.
So here's a few examples of
what that might look like.
So for instance,
if I want to get the title of a button,
well, the AppleScript way, of course,
would be just title of button.
But so for this example,
I can call title,
the method called title,
because that's actually the
Objective-C method on NS control,
I believe, of object button one.
The second one then, of course,
is a little more complicated.
It actually takes one parameter.
So this is going to be seven.
So I'm just cutting the
title of the button,
passing it one parameter of testing.
And then the third one is
going to just two parameters.
Of course,
you can do that by counting the
number of colons in that method name.
In this case,
we are going to pass it two parameters.
And we pass it an AppleScript list.
And here's some examples of class method.
And I'll go through these quickly.
So if I wanted to get a hold of the
class method called string of NSString,
I simply do it this way.
And this is a little
more complicated version.
And this one's actually kind of cool.
It exposes dictionaries to AppleScript.
It's called AppleScript Studio.
You can actually return
a dictionary object,
good old NSDictionary,
and then you can start playing
with it to your heart's desire.
You can set keys, get keys,
get the values, all that fun stuff.
All right.
And so we'd like to demonstrate
a little bit of this for you.
So we'll go back to M1.
M1.
Okay, this demo isn't all that flashy,
but it sort of illustrates a few points.
We're going to go ahead and open it up.
Let's sort it.
Yep.
And we're going to
build and run it first.
Actually, let's select some code, John.
What it does is just a simple application
that lets us paste in some text,
and then it's going to sort it using
a few different means to do so.
Because one of the advantages
to calling another language
is for performance reasons.
So we'll go ahead and copy that,
and we'll build and run it.
And he simply pastes in this text,
and making lists just makes it
very simply a list of items,
but you can see that it's not sorted.
And so we want to make sure
our run screen is here.
And let's go in and go ahead,
and we're going to click on Slow Sort.
Now this is using
AppleScript to do the sort.
And you'll notice that the other
one has AppleScript as well,
so I don't want you to think
that AppleScript is slow.
But what it is,
it's really a bad algorithm.
It's just a simple bubble sort.
So we're going to go
ahead and click on that.
And if I can see the monitor down here,
it's sorting about 226 items.
And it took about, how long,
we've got 39, 40, almost 8 seconds,
7 seconds, something about that.
So not all that terribly
fast for just 262 items.
So let's go back in and
select some more text.
Let's go grab the entire script.
And we're going to go back in,
we're going to paste that in.
And this time,
we're going to use a much more
efficient-- matter of fact,
let's paste it twice.
Because it's a lot of script.
We're going to go ahead and execute this.
And you'll notice,
go ahead and bring up our run
window first so we can see it.
Oh, no, don't click it yet.
There you go.
So it actually does it for you.
But go ahead if you like.
Make it a list.
It'll do the same thing.
Go ahead and fast sort it.
This one took about two seconds,
so that's quite a, you know,
just in a bit of an algorithm.
So let's actually take a look at
the script that's behind this.
And let's go down and look at SlowSort.
And let's scroll up just a bit so we
can see all of the handler for this.
It's just a simple, very, in essence,
brain-dead sort algorithm.
But let's take a look at the FastSort,
when we click that FastSort button.
And it's calling some script that
I found out on the web called QuickSort.
Now everything he's going to show
you from this point on down is
all the script that's necessary
to execute this QuickSort.
And it keeps going, and it keeps going,
and it keeps going, and it keeps going.
I was actually extremely
pleasantly surprised,
for as much script as there was,
how fast it actually executed
compared to the slower version.
But we can do a lot better in this case.
And we can add some
Objective-C code to our application.
So let's quit the app.
Let's go into Interface Builder.
And what we're going to do is we're
going to add a button to our UI.
And let's go ahead and
duplicate that one there.
Okay.
Duplicate that one.
There you go.
Okay, good.
And we're going to
call this Fastest Sort.
So I'll change the title,
make sure it says Objective-C.
Want to give proper credit.
And then we're going to name that
button in our AppleScript panel.
And we're going to call this FastAssort.
Okay, and click on the click handler.
And this time,
we're going to make sure we click
on the AppleScript and attach it.
All right,
let's go ahead and edit script.
Okay, and then we're going to add
ourself a new little handler.
In the middle of the clicked handler,
there's a little test here to
see which button was clicked,
and then we call the appropriate sort,
because from that point on,
the rest of the code is the same.
So we're just going to simply check
to see if it's the fastest sort,
and we're going to add a new handler.
Let's add that down below our fast sort.
And that's our AppleScript.
Simply one line of call method.
Sort array with parameter.
Now you'll notice in this case,
and I didn't talk about this,
is that there isn't an
of object or of class.
And what happens is if you don't
provide an object or class,
it looks first to the application object.
And it says, okay,
do you have a delegate?
Okay, yes.
If you have a delegate,
do you handle this method?
Yes.
Then it will call that
method of that delegate.
Now if you don't have a
delegate or you can't handle it,
then we'll just simply pass it as
a method to the application itself.
And so that's sometimes the
easiest way for us to add this.
We're going to add it as a category.
So we've got a couple files
already pre-built here.
Very little code.
It's a .h and a .m file.
We're going to drag it into
our project and add it.
And let's take a look at the .h file.
And you can see that it's simply
just a category on NSApplication.
We just call it sortSupport.
And it is a simple method.
It takes an array and returns an array,
an NSArray.
So let's look at the implementation.
And all it really does is
set up a result to return.
Again, it's just a category.
And then it checks to
see if we have an array,
make sure we have more than one item.
Doesn't make sense to sort one item.
So actually, there's a bug here.
Anybody see it?
If there's only one item?
Nope.
If there's only one item,
I'm returning nil.
And I should return the
array that was passed in.
Good, I found that one.
All right, so what it does,
it actually calls sorted
array using selector.
This is a standard
foundation in NSString class,
and it takes a selector,
and there's already a compare
method that we can call.
And that's it.
And so let's go ahead
and build and run this.
And let's go copy-- as soon as it's up,
let's go copy our source again.
And select all of that.
And we'll go back into
our test and paste it in.
And trust me,
it sorts when you click the button.
That was just as a demonstration.
But if you like,
go ahead and click Fast Sort.
We'll test this one more time.
Should we paste it again?
Yeah.
No, just out-disk it twice.
OK, we want it twice.
Because we found that this machine's
so fast that we had to add a little
extra text to make the test interesting.
It does the same thing.
Do it one more time.
Paste it in.
We'll give it the benefit of the doubt.
Paste.
Make list.
Sort.
Okay, it's doing, let's see,
how many items?
1626, and how many seconds?
About two and a half seconds, it looks.
Not too bad.
Now we're going to try the Objective-C,
so let's go ahead and paste it in.
Twice.
All right,
and this time we're going to call the,
go ahead and make a list,
don't believe me,
and we're going to do the
fastest sort of Objective-C.
And you can see that it actually
did it in just about .4 seconds,
so it's quite an improvement in speed.
All right, thank you.
Slides, please.
Thank you.
Actually, we've got to jump back up.
Let's go back to demo.
I forgot one thing.
1, 2, 4.
OK.
So that shows just how to do Objective-C.
What I would like to show
you is an example that ships
in AppleScript Studio 1.1.
It's called multi-language.
Let's go and open that up and
show you that we can actually call
all of these various languages.
Let's open up our resource file.
And again, as far as UI,
it's not all that sophisticated.
It has a column of buttons
and a column of text fields.
And when you click on
each of these buttons,
it fills out the value
of that language name.
It gets the name from that
language and puts it in here.
And so let's look at the
implementation for the AppleScript one.
So we'll go to the AppleScript.
Actually, just go to Edit Script.
Or just open up the
AppleScript folder there.
Which one?
AppleScript right there.
Open the AppleScript.
There you go.
And open that one up.
And here's the implementation.
When you click on the AppleScript button,
it simply says,
set contents of text field, AppleScript,
AppleScript.
Well, one can imagine implementation
that does that for every button,
right?
Well, that wouldn't be very useful.
So we'll actually take a look at each
of these buttons and see what they do.
So let's open up-- let's start with a C.
And open that one up.
And look at the C AppleScript.
And it simply does a set contents
of text field to a call method,
name for C language.
So we're going to look in
our .mm file this time.
This is actually an Objective-C++
file that we've added to our project.
And if we go down to the
implementation of that method,
name for actually the C language,
you'll see that it calls a
function that we've added in a
C file called getNameForCLanguage.
A couple other things.
Let's take a look at this
for the Objective-C object,
what it does.
Actually, let's open up the C file.
C.C.
There you go.
And let's look at the
implementation of this.
You can tell it's actually a
shipping example because it's
got tons of legal stuff here.
GetNameForCLanguage returns a simple
character array just with the letter C.
So let's look at the Objective-C object.
And let's look at the
implementation first in the .mm.
Now when you choose
the Objective-C button,
what it does is it calls the call
method named for Objective-C.
Now this is obviously repetitive.
Every one of them does the same thing.
So let's close that and
look at the .mm file,
look at the implementation for that.
Note .mm.
There you go.
And let's look at the
Objective-C language one.
Objective-- there you go.
OK, good.
So what it does is it instantiates an
Objective-C object in doing alloc init,
auto-release.
We're being a good citizen.
And then it simply just takes
that object and calls name on it.
We get the name from the language.
And the simplification
for it is very simple.
We can look at it.
We'll skip it for now.
Let's look down.
Let's look at the C++.
Now, since this is an Objective C++ file,
it can actually compile C++ code right
inside of our Objective C++ code.
And right here,
what it's doing is it's constructing
a C++ language class that I added.
It then will create an NSString,
because that's the thing we have to
return from this back to AppleScript.
And you'll notice that
there's a language.name.
And so it's simply calling
the method on that language,
that C++ object,
to get its name and returns it.
Now, it's the same thing
for the Java language.
If we're going through the Java bridge,
right below here,
you'll see name for Java language.
In this case,
it uses a function that's built into
Foundation called NSClassFromString.
And you'll notice that what you do is
you provide it the name of the class.
And that will give you
the Java language object.
It actually allocates it
as an Objective C object.
And then you can use it just like you
did the previous Objective C object.
Let's actually look at that one.
Let's open up the Java class
down in the Java folder.
Over in your project.
Over here in the project.
Yeah, there you go.
And let's look at that.
Well, we'll look in the .java file.
Okay, so here we've got a .java
file in our project,
and it simply just
defines a simple class,
Java language.
It has a constructor that just
simply signs the data member
underscore name to some value,
returns that name,
and then has these other values in here,
and a pen name to string,
which we'll show later.
So you can see that what it does is it
just uses it through the Java bridge.
Now,
let's look at the java.applescript file.
And you'll notice what it does,
it tests to see which button we clicked.
Because if we clicked the
one that's named Java,
it calls the one that we just called.
But if I call the direct Java,
what it's really doing is it's
calling directly into Java.
It's not going through
the Objective-C bridge or
through Objective-C code.
I'm just calling right in.
I'm instantiating a Java object and
calling the method on that handle.
And so let's go back into our .mm file.
And let's look at the last one.
When you click on all the languages,
this one's kind of fun.
Because what it does is it creates a
mutable string here at the beginning.
It creates a C++ object.
It creates an Objective-C object.
It creates a Java object.
And then starting at the very far right,
get name for C language,
it keeps passing back
the result in an append.
And so I call every single language,
and then I pass that string back.
So let's build and run this.
Okay, we'll click on AppleScript.
It's very obvious what it's going to do
at this point if everything's working.
Objective C, C.
So that right there just
called our C function.
The C++ instantiated a C++ object,
returned the string.
Java went to the Java bridge,
direct Java went directly to Java.
And the use all, the piece de resistance
is to call all of them,
and there you go.
So it's just that easy to add multiple
languages and take advantage of your
legacy code and all these other things
that you can bring into your project.
Thank you, John.
Alright,
let's talk a little bit about what
you're going to find in Jaguar.
Get it right.
I'm not supposed to say Jagwire.
I learned it.
We're going to actually,
you'll notice that in
the Studio version 1.0,
1.1, there's a document-based template.
Unfortunately,
it doesn't work all that well.
And so we're going to vastly
improve and make it very,
very easy to create
document-based applications.
So we should be able to
create a text-edit app,
I think, in maybe two lines of code,
as far as actual script you write.
It will be very, very simple.
You'll just be asked at
the appropriate time,
what is the data you want
saved in your document?
You just simply return the type
of thing you want to store,
whether it be a string, a list,
or a list of records, or any complex
AppleScript object that you want.
And then when you load the document,
you'll get called as an event handler,
and you'll be provided with
that data that you gave.
So just two handlers you'll
add to your document object.
And away you go.
Now, if that doesn't fill your needs,
there'll be two other alternative methods
called read from file and write to file.
So you can actually get
called at the point that that
process would normally happen.
You don't have to worry
about any of the UI.
You'll set up all of your document types.
That's all set up in the project.
You don't have to worry about it being,
you can set the document
whether it's dirty or not,
but most of the time
it's handled for you.
It'll prompt for all the
right save dialogues.
That's all built in and supported.
Next thing that we really have heard
once in a while on the list is DragonFly.
And that's the fact that we're going to
be using DragonDrop because today all
you can do is drag some file objects
to your application like a droplet.
It would be great if we,
these are of course not any
hard set in stone promises,
but we are going to provide
some DragonDrop support,
as many objects as we possibly can.
So you can drag into text fields or
other views or objects and receive
notification and get the data from that
drag and then do something with that.
And in order to do that,
we also have to support the pasteboard
because that's what's stored in the
drag information when you drag on that.
One of my favorite ones,
and the thing I'm hoping to
get to spend some time on,
or that we're going
to spend some time on,
is the data source improvements.
And those of you that have used
Studio found that the table adding
data to a data source that gets
populated in a table isn't as
fast as it possibly could be.
And we've put out some support code,
some Objective-C code,
to make that much faster.
So for instance, hopefully,
we'll build it right into
AppleScript so you don't have
to call any Objective-C code.
So you can do something like
take a list of records and simply
add it to your data source.
With one line of code,
it'll quickly populate your data source,
and away you go.
Now things that are a little further
out ahead that we're looking at is
talking about a script property.
We want to be able to have you at
runtime actually get the script
of the UI object or set the
script so that you can dynamically
change these things on the fly.
It solves a lot of problems for us and
something we're very excited about.
Now that's sort of all the runtime
things that we want to work on.
There are also development side things.
We want to vastly improve
the dictionary viewer.
It would be great if you could,
for instance,
select some term in your script
and have it go look it up in the
dictionary viewer for you or help.
There's a lot of things
we want to do there.
An object hierarchy viewer right
in your applications so you can
see all of your objects and see
the attributes of that object.
We're also really,
really excited about web services
and what that means for us and what
we can do so that you can create
some really compelling applications.
And so we're going to be
working on better ways.
A lot of what we're going to
leverage off of the work that's
being done at the web services.
Client framework level.
We're going to build off of that
and add better things on top of it.
And the last one which is sort of
really out there is other OSA languages.
There are people that actually want
to build Apple Script Studio apps
in Python or Perl.
And as long as they can
provide an OSA component,
it's something that's within
the realm of possibility.
And so we'll look at trying
to do those type of things.
At the moment, with Studio 1.1 that
just shipped last week,
it's in your development.
It's in the developer CD.
It's in the release notes.
There's actually a defaults
write that disables the auto
generation of the Apple Script when
you're in an interface builder.
I had somebody send me an email saying,
"Well, I wrote this Python thing,
but the problem is every
time I went into IB,
it generated Apple Script in my
Python file." So at least we sort
of got out of his way so he could
do whatever else he'd like to do.
[Transcript missing]
And this is the roadmap.
Of course, we had our AppleScript update
this session this morning.
I actually learned a few things myself,
which is great.
I'm very excited about SDEFs.
AppleScriptKit is going to take
very quick advantage of SDEFs,
so that I only have to write in one file
and not 18 pairs of all these suites.
It's going to be a great thing.
We have our feedback
forum tomorrow at 3.30.
I look forward to having you there.
The Cocoa scripting,
which I highly recommend,
because we leverage everything
off of foundation scripting.
If you're interested in the
Objective-C or Java side,
go to that session.
If you're new to Project Builder,
make sure you check out
the Project Builder ID.
And this is who you can contact,
Jason Yeo and myself.
Feel free to send me an email.
And then my manager, Chris Espinosa.
And with that,
there's also one other thing,
if you want to get some more information,
check out the Studio website.
This website is going
to grow in the future.
It's hopefully the place we're going
to be using as a repository for great
examples of Studio applications.
And the one I recommend most is to get
on the AppleScript Studio mailing list.
We monitor it as much as possible.
We answer as many as we can.
It's a great resource.
There's starting to be a
community that's developing that
are starting to help each other,
which is wonderful.
And then there's also the
documentation can be found.
The slide is incorrect.
It should be uppercase D,
uppercase E at AppleScript Studio.